# Promise

I find the Codacademy content confusing so I'm reading the official Mozilla tutorial now:

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises



https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop

A `Promise` object represents the eventual resolution of an asynchronous operation. In particular, it represents its **state** and the associated **value**, ie:

- fulfilled(value)
- rejected(reason)

(In addition, a promise object that has not yet been resolved/settled is in *pending* state)



### Creation

Promises are created using the Promise constructor.

```javascript
const myPromise = new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
    setTimeout(() => resolve("foo"), 300)
})
```

The constructor takes a function with 2 arguments, which are functions that indicate ("tags") a success or failure with the associated value.



As a shorthand, we can use static methods to create Promises that immediately resolve to a success or failure:

```javascript
const successfulPromise = Promise.resolve("successValue")
const failurePromise = Promise.reject("failureValue")
```



Of course, all modern asynchronous functions should return a promise, so it is rare when the Promise constructor is used. But when the function is old, we can use the constructor to wrap it as a Promise:

```javascript
function wait(ms) {
    return new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve,ms))
}
```



### Chaining

You can specify what to do with the promised value after it settles, by attaching it with a continuation. The magic of this is that, the newly attached promise is just a new promise. This makes Promise work like a continuation monad, and so chaining (or monadic bind) can be done.

**With each chain, the next continuation is only called after the previous promise is settled. If we pass a continuation that returns a promise, further execution will be blocked until that promise is settled, and its value (or error) will be passed as the argument for the next continuation.**



`.then`

It takes 2 (optional) positional arguments, a continuation for success and a continuation for failure.

```javascript
myPromise
.then(successA, failureA)
.then(successB, failureB)
.then(successC, failureC)
```



The main motivation for `Promise` is to solve the "callback of hell" problem. Traditionally, callbacks (continuations) are written as arguments to the asynchronous function, so the above promise is written something like so:

```javascript
myPromise(function(res) {
    successA(res, function(res) {
        successB(res, function(res) {
            successC(res)
        },failureC)
    },failureB)
},failureA)
```

Every function then takes at least 3 arguments, the value to continue on, a success continuation (which is called if the value given is a success), and a failure continuation.



Note, the `.then` construct don't need to take arguments. And when the associated continuation isn't found, the resolved value is simply passed down the chain as it is.



An acute functional programmer might spot the structure to be similar to a fold. Indeed,  a chained promise can be though of a fold on a list of continuations

```javascript
[func1, func2, func3].reduce((p,f) => p.then(f), Promise.resolve())
```

This is because the `.then`  function has the type

```scala
then :: Iterable List => (Continuation -> Promise -> Promise) -> Promise -> List[Continuation] -> Promise
```

which is close enough to that of a fold

```haskell
foldr :: Foldable t => (a -> b -> b) -> b -> t a -> b
```





`.catch`

This is where `.catch` comes in. `.catch` only takes 1 argument, which is the failure callback.

As `.then` uses positional arguments and failure comes second, this cannot be done using `.then`.

Because of the "fallthrough" mechanism of `.then` introduced earlier, we can have a `.catch` that handles failures that happen in multiple places in the chain.

```javascript
myPromise
.then(successA)
.then(successB)
.then(successC)
.catch(failureCallback)
```

compare this with:

```javascript
myPromise
.then(successA,failureCallback)
.then(successB,failureCallback)
.then(successC,failureCallback)
```



We can also chain after a `.catch` Note, `.catch` doesn't return any value, so in that case the continuation must not take an argument

```javascript
myPromise
.then(successA)
.then(successB)
.then(successC)
.catch(failureCallback)
.then(() => console.log("I'm still alive!"))
```





### Execution

Promise is a weird structure, as it both represents a continuation as well as the execution of it.

When you write a promise inside your script, it is executed *asynchronously* as soon as the interpreter parses it.

```javascript
console.log("start")

const myPromise = new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
    setTimeout(() => resolve("foo"), 300)
})

console.log("end")

myPromise.then(res => console.log(res))

// Returns:
// start
// end
// foo
```





### Nesting

Usually only the first promise takes a while, and the attached continuations are synchronous. But we can (as mentioned earlier) have promises as the value returned from continuations for more nuanced effects

```javascript
doSomethingCritical()
.then(result => doSomethingOptional(result)
  .then(optionalResult => doSomethingExtraNice(optionalResult))
  .catch(e => {})) // Ignore if optional stuff fails; proceed.
.then(() => moreCriticalStuff())
.catch(e => console.error("Critical failure: " + e.message));
```

A few things to note here:

- Again, the second `.then` is only executed after the promise inside the first `.then` is settled, as guaranteed by Promise
- the `.catch(e => {})` only catches error inside the `doSomethingOptional` Promise chain, errors from `doSomethingCritical` is caught by the `.catch` in the last line



A common mistake is to **not return the promise** inside a continuation. In that case, the Promise will actually execute asynchronously, in parallel with the rest of the chain.

```javascript
function delayedMessage(msg,ms) {
    return new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(() => {console.log(msg), resolve(msg)}, ms))
}

Promise.resolve()
.then(() => delayedMessage(1000,"first"))
.then(() => delayedMessage(500,"second"))

// first
// second
```

vs.

```javascript
function delayedMessage(msg,ms) {
    return new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(() => {console.log(msg), resolve(msg)}, ms))
}

Promise.resolve()
.then(function() {delayedMessage(1000,"first")})
.then(() => delayedMessage(500,"second"))

// second
// first
```

^^ as first continuation returns `undefined`, and so the second continuation is executed immediately, without waiting for the `delayedMessage(1000,"first")` Promise to finish.



### Composition and other fancy constructs

`Promise.prototype.finally()`

Appends a handler to the promise, and returns a new promise that is resolved when the original promise is resolved. The handler is called when the promise is settled, whether fulfilled or rejected.

=> basically a handler for both success and failure



`Promise.all(iterable)`

Wait for all promises to be resolved, or for any to be rejected.

If the returned promise resolves, it is resolved with an aggregating array of the values from the resolved promises, in the same order as defined in the iterable of multiple promises.

If it rejects, it is rejected with the reason from the first promise in the iterable that was rejected.



`Promise.allSettled(iterable)`

Wait until all promises have settled (each may resolve or reject).

Returns a Promise that resolves after all of the given promises is either fulfilled or rejected, with an array of objects that each describe the outcome of each promise.



`Promise.any(iterable)`

Takes an iterable of Promise objects and, as soon as one of the promises in the iterable fulfills, returns a single promise that resolves with the value from that promise.



`Promise.race(iterable)`

Wait until any of the promises is fulfilled or rejected.

If the returned promise resolves, it is resolved with the value of the first promise in the iterable that resolved.

If it rejects, it is rejected with the reason from the first promise that was rejected.





### Async-Await

https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/primers/async-functions

Async-Await is a nice syntactic sugar for Promises.

If you use the `async` keyword before a function definition, you can then use
`await` within the function. When you `await` a promise, the function is paused
in a non-blocking way until the promise settles. If the promise fulfills, you
get the value back (as a promise). If the promise rejects, the rejected value is thrown.



^^Note: When a promise is created inside an `async` function, it will be called asynchronously, regardless of whether there exist an `await` keyword to extract its settled value.

```javascript
function delayedHi(ms) {
    return new Promise(resolve => {
        setTimeout(() => {console.log("hi"), resolve("foo")}, ms)
    })
}

async function main() {
    const myPromise = delayedHi(1000)
}

main()

// Will print "hi" after 1s
```

and understand the following code:

```javascript
function delayedHi(ms) {
    return new Promise(resolve => {
        setTimeout(() => {console.log("hi"), resolve("foo")}, ms)
    })
}

async function main() {
    const myPromise = delayedHi(1000)
    console.log(await myPromise + "bar")
}

main()

// Will print "hi" after 1s, then foobar immediately after
```



**A slightly more involved example**

```javascript
function logFetch(url) {
  return fetch(url)
    .then(response => response.text())
    .then(text => {
      console.log(text);
    })
    .catch(err => {
      console.error('fetch failed', err);
    });
}
```

here's the same function in async-await syntax:

```javascript
async function logFetch(url) {
  try {
    const response = await fetch(url);
    console.log(await response.text());
  }
  catch (err) {
    console.log('fetch failed', err);
  }
}
```



**An asynchronous function always returns a promise**. How? If the function returns a value, the promise resolves to that value. If the function raises an error, the promise rejects with that error.





Another benefit of the async-await syntax is that it can unroll a self-recursive function into an iterative one using a while loop:

```javascript
// Returns a promise that resolves to the list of items for a particular account
function getItems(url) {
    return fetch(url).then(response => {
        let items = []
        
        return Promise.resolve(response).then(function processResult(res) {
            if (!res.nextPage) return items
            
            items = items.concat(res.items)
            return fetch(response.nextPage).then(processResult)
        }
    })   
}
```

This above function will fetch all the items in all the pages, starting from the base URL. It uses the fact that returning a inner Promise in a continuation will give an outer Promise that settles on the (unwrapped) *value* of the inner Promise.

To do this, we first return a Promise, it has the structure

```
fetch(url)
.then(response => PROMISE)
```

 Now, the settled value of this Promise is the settled value of PROMISE. What is that? Well PROMISE has structure

```
Promise.resolve(response)
.then(processResult(res) => {
	return items
	OR
	return PROMISE2
})
```

So it can return the list of items, that's good that's what we want. But what about the inductive case? Well, again, the settled value of PROMISE is the settled value of PROMISE2.

But PROMISE2 has exactly the same structure as PROMISE (Promise.resolve(response) = fetch(url)). So the induction goes.

Now, `await` provides a much simpler way to extract out the value of a Promise than forcing it to be something returned from a continuation. So the above function can be written as follows:

```javascript
// Returns a promise that resolves to the list of items for a particular account
async function getItems(url) {
    let response = await fetch(url)
    let items = await response.items
    
	while (await response.nextPage) {
		response = await fetch(response.nextPage)
        items = items.concat(await response.items)
    }
    
    return items
}
```





**Avoiding doing things too sequential**

Remember, `async-await` allows you to have more flexible approach to concurrency.

Say the example of fetching the content of a bunch of URLs, then displaying them in some order.

```javascript
async function logInOrder(urls) {
    for (const url of urls) {
        const response = await fetch(url)
        console.log(await response.text())
    }
}
```

But this slow, as the next fetch can only start after the last. Instead, we can issue task to fetch all at once, and log the text one by one as soon as it is ready:

```javascript
async function logInOrder(urls) {
    // Map the list of urls into a list of promises
    const textPromises = urls.map(async url => {
        const response = await fetch(url)
        return response.text()
    })
    
    for (const textPromise of textPromises) {
        console.log(await textPromise)
    }
}
```

If you feel adventurous, we can do a map followed by a fold to construct our promise chain. For some magical reason, the resulting chain is able to fire all the promises at once, giving the desired effect.

```javascript
function logInOrder(urls) {
  // fetch all the URLs
  const textPromises = urls.map(url => {
    return fetch(url).then(response => response.text());
  });

  // log them in order
  textPromises.reduce((chain, textPromise) => {
    return chain
           .then(() => textPromise)
           .then(text => console.log(text));
  }, Promise.resolve());
}
```





















---



Codacademy content:

- Promise is just, well, a promise to do something. It'll either resolve if successful, or be rejected if not
- The code inside the new Promise will run asynchronously upon instantiation?
- Promise solves the problem of 
  - Javascript callback hell, aka. Pyramid of Doom
  - Separation of concerns. The promise need not to worry for what to do if resolved or rejected, it simply reports back if it's resolved or rejected.
    The then() part will take care of the callbacks





```javascript
let p = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    const a = 1 + 1
    if  (a === 2) {
        resolve('Success')
    } else {
        reject('Failure')
    }
})

p
.then(message => console.log(message))
.catch(message => console.log(message))
```

You can pass one value **of any type** into the resolve() and reject() functions. (You can ofc choose other names for those 2 functions, only the order matter). These are the values that will be passed into the callback of .then()

As JS doesn't care about white space, the syntax for .then and .catch is clearer this way. This is a code style convention. 